{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f276\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f277\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f279\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f280\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f281\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f282\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f283\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f284\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f286\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f287\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f289\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f290\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f291\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f292\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f293\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f294\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}{\f296\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}
{\f297\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f299\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f300\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f301\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}
{\f302\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f303\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f304\fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 \styrsid11410870 Plain Text;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2961612\rsid6712066\rsid7811450\rsid8325435\rsid11207752\rsid11410870\rsid13441493\rsid15878962\rsid16147491}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.2627;}{\info{\title VarroaPop - Varroa Mite Population Model}{\author Bob}{\operator Bob}{\creatim\yr2005\mo1\dy6\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr2005\mo1\dy6\hr16\min8}{\version3}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1670}{\nofchars9519}
{\*\company Crystal River}{\nofcharsws11167}{\vern16437}}\margl1319\margr1319 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot2961612 \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sectrsid11410870\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang 
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid11410870 \f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\insrsid8325435\charrsid8325435 
VarroaPop - Varroa Mite Population Model
\par 
\par VarroaPop is a honeybee colony population model that incorporates the effects of a varroa mite infestation.  VarroaPop allows the user to evaluate the effects of a variety of initial conditions and weather on the
 population growth of a Varroa mites and honeybees.  It also allows the user to simulate the effects of varroa immigration into an existing colony.
\par 
\par *********************************************************************
\par New Features in Version 2.1
\par 
\par Added command-line control capabilities.  See VarroaPop Help for details
\par 
\par 
\par *********************************************************************
\par New Features in Version 2.0
\par 
\par Re-Queening feature
\par \tab Now you can re-queen the colony to more accurately perform a multi-year simulation.  Re-queening can either be automatic based on colony parameters or tied to specific dates.
\par 
\par 
\par Mite Treatment
\par \tab You can now simulate the treatment of a colony with Varroa pesticides.  
\par 
\par Miscellaneous
\par \tab Added capability to toggle betweeen weekly and daily results display and storage.  This helps if you are looking at multi-year data but don't want to generate reams of paper.  Also, the "Weekly" selection results in faster simulation runs.
\par \tab 
\par \tab Now each output graph remains on the screen until the user closes it.  This facilitates making several runs with varied initial conditons and graphically comparing the results.
\par 
\par 
\par *********************************************************************
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Software Information
\par 
\par 1. System Requirements
\par 
\par In order to use VarroaPop, you must have Microsoft Windows 95, Windows NT 4.0 , or later versions installed on your computer.  The VarroaPop software will consume approximately 1 MB of memory on your hard drive.
\par 
\par 2. VarroaPop Files
\par 
\par After installing VarroaPop, you will have the following files in the installation directory (e.g. C:\\VarroaPop):
\par 
\par VarroaPop.exe - the VarroaPop program
\par Midwest.wth - a weather file containing 1 year of Midwestern US weather date
\par Southwest.wth - a weather file containing 1 year of Southwestern US weather data
\par Midwest5yr.wth - a weather file containing five years of Midwestern US weather data
\par Sthwest5yr.wth - a weather file containing five years of Southwestern US weather data
\par Example.col - an example colony file containing a set of initial conditions.
\par Default.vrp - a sample VarropPop session file.
\par Readme.txt - this file
\par 
\par 3. Running the VarroaPop program
\par 
\par As with any Windows program, you can run VarroaPop from the Start button or from Windows Explorer.  
\par 
\par To run from the Start button, press Start->Programs and scroll down to and select the VarroaPop folder.  When you select this, you will see the VarroaPop icon.  Double-click on this and VarroaPop will begin.
\par 
\par  
\par To run from Windows Explorer, start Windows Explorer (normally listed when you select Start->Programs).  Navigate to the folder containing VarroaPop.exe.  Double-click on VarroaPop.exe and VarroaPop will start.
\par 
\par Alternately, you can place a shortcut to VarroaPop on your desktop.  This 
can be done by first navigating to the VarroaPop program with Windows Explorer in the same way as described above.  If you drag the VarroaPop icon from the Explorer window and drop it on your desktop, Windows will create a shortcut for you.  From that poi
nt on, you can run VarroaPop by double-clicking the shortcut.
\par 
\par 
\par Using VarroaPop
\par 
\par 1.  Overview
\par 
\par The basic concept of VarroaPop is to take some initial conditions for a honeybee colony, combine that with some weather data, then step day-by-day over a s
pecific simulation period and monitor the colony's population changes.  As you read this file, we will refer to a VarroaPop session.  A session is comprised of the weather data and the colony initial conditions.
\par 
\par After the simulation has been run, Varroa
Pop displays the results two ways.  First, a graphical result is displayed on the screen.  This graphical result can simultaneously show the value of multiple user-selected parameters plotted over time.  The other result information consists of tabular da
ta that is shown on the VarroaPop main window.  The tabular and graphical results can be saved to a file for later use and it can be printed.
\par 
\par As a comment on notation, when we refer to a menu selection, the notation "File->Save->Results" means, press the "File" menu selection, then press the "Save" selection on the resulting menu, and finally, press the "Results" selection on the next menu.

\par 
\par 
\par 2. Details
\par 
\par 2.1 Initial Screen
\par 
\par When VarroaPop first starts, the initial screen is displayed:
\par 
\par No session is loaded yet so no simulation can be performed.  The first step is to either create a simulation from scratch or load an existing simulation.  
\par 
\par 2.2 Starting a VarroaPop Session
\par 
\par The easiest thing to do is to load an existing simulation.  That can be
 done from the menu by selecting File->Open.  At that point, a file open dialog is displayed and you can select an existing VarroaPop session file.  First time users should choose the DEFAULT.VRP file by navigating to the installation directory.  Files ca
n also be opened by pressing the File Open button on the toolbar.
\par 
\par To see the initial conditions that were just loaded with the file, select View->Model Parameters.  You will then see the colony name and the initial numbers of workers and drones at all li
fe stages.  The number of days a worker can forage is displayed and can be controlled by sliding the small rectangle horizontally.  Information about the queen is also displayed.  You can change any of these values but you must press the OK button for the
 changes to take effect.
\par 
\par A new session can be created by selecting File->New.  This will display a blank Colony Initial Conditions screen that can be filled out as desired (more about that later).  Again, the same result can be obtained by pressing the New button on the toolbar.

\par 
\par 2.3 Running a Simulation
\par 
\par Once a session is loaded, the simulation start and stop dates on the right side of the screen become active and are initially set to the beginning and ending dates in the weather data.  You can chang
e the simulation start and stop times to be any timespan of interest within the limits of the weather data dates.  Once you have selected the Simulation Start and Stop dates (e.g. Start 01/01/1999, Stop 12/31/2001) press the Run button (found on the lower
 right side of the main screen) to begin the simulation.  When the simulation is complete, the results are displayed graphically.  To better see the tabular form press OK on the graphic screen.  You may print and/or save the tabular results.
\par 
\par The simulation may be re-run at any time by just pressing the Run button again.  Rather than getting the same results over and over, however, you will usually want to make some changes in your session between successive simulations.
\par 
\par 2.4 Modifying the Session
\par 
\par There are many variables you can modify before running a simulation.  These include initial conditions, weather data, graphical display parameters, and immigration profiles.  All these modifications are stored when you save the session.
\par 
\par Modifying Initial Conditions and Weather Data
\par 
\par Initial conditions and weather data are modified using the Model Parameters dialog box.  This display is obtained by selecting View->Model Parameters or by pressing the Model Parameters toggle button on the toolbar.  This button looks like a honeycomb.

\par 
\par The Colony Name field (at the top of the screen) will be blank on a new session.  The Colony Name field will contain the name of the current colony data for an existing session.  Pressing the down arrow next to the Colony Name
 field will display all the existing colony files in the current folder.
\par 
\par You can enter initial conditions for Worker and Drone populations in each of the life stages.  You can also enter initial conditions for Varroa mite infestation percentages, mite r
eproductive rate and survivorship.  You can also set the forager lifespan as well as parameters relating to the amount of sperm in the queen's spermacetha and the maximum potential number of eggs the queen can lay per day.  In order for any changes made t
o take effect, you must press the Apply button.
\par 
\par You can also modify the weather data you are using by pressing the Weather tab.  This will display a field identifying the current weather file (blank if this is a new session).  Similar to the Colony Name 
field, pressing the down arrow next to the weather file name field will display all weather files in the folder.  You must press the Select button to actually choose a weather file.  
\par 
\par The weather files are text files that can be read by any application 
that can load text (WordPad, Write, MS Word, etc.)  If you need to actually change the data in a weather file, you can load the file into an application, edit it, and re-save it as a text file but be sure the file extension is ".wth".
\par 
\par To save the changes made to the Session, select File->Save->Save Session.  If you want to save the changes to a file with a different name, select File->SaveAs and enter the filename you would like to use.
\par 
\par Modifying Parameters to Graph
\par 
\par You can graphically display all 
important parameters resulting from the simulation.  In order to allow you to focus on just the data you want, a Graph Selection dialog is displayed by either selecting View->Plot Data Selection or by pressing the Plot Data Selection button on the toolbar
. 
\par 
\par You can select as many of these parameters as you would like, however with more than four or five, individual lines are difficult to discern.  Select the parameter to be included in the graph by placing the pointer n the box next to the parameter and 
pressing the left mouse button.  Also note that the Proportion of Infested Brood values will always be between 0 and 1 while parameters such as Colony Size can get very large.  Therefore, you won't see the Proportion parameters if you plot them with popul
ation counts. 
\par 
\par 
\par Modifying Immigration Profiles
\par 
\par You can enable or disable immigration of adult Varroa mites by making the proper selection on the main screen.  To change or set up the immigration profiles, press the Setup button in the Immigration blo
ck on the main screen.  The Immigration block is above the simulation block on the right side of the screen.  To set up an immigration event, click on Setup.  You will see a screen that allows you to select the immigration distribution from six predefined
 
distributions by clicking on the one desired.  You can define how many mites will immigrate by entering a number in the Number of Mites Immigrating box on the left side of the screen.  Finally, you can select the Immigration Start and End dates on the rig
ht side of the screen.  These dates must lie within the simulation timespan.  When you are finished, select OK.
\par 
\par Saving Simulation Results
\par 
\par To save simulation results in tabular form, choose File->Save->Simulation Results and enter the name for the file.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par You are now ready to run a VarroaPop simulation.  You can obtain additional information any time during the operation of the program by select Help from the main menu.
\par 
\par }{\f1\insrsid11410870\charrsid8325435 
\par }}